The Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI) Hub Data Model is a structured framework designed to standardize and harmonize pediatric cancer data across diverse research platforms. It defines key entities—such as participants, diagnoses, biospecimens, and treatments—and their relationships to ensure consistent data representation. The model plays a central role in enabling data integration, sharing, and analysis within the CCDI Data Ecosystem.

The CCDI Hub data model unites multiple childhood cancer studies and drives the search experience. As a graph-based model, nodes function as tables in a traditional relational database and properties within each node effectively represent what would be columns or fields in the corresponding table. Relationships between nodes and properties are maintained at the level of individual records. Where possible, Common Data Elements (CDEs) generated by the [Cancer Data Standards Registry and Repository](https://cadsr.cancer.gov/onedata/Home.jsp) are used to define properties to enhance data accuracy, consistency, and interoperability across health research domains.

### Node Categories

Each node in the model is assigned to a category, with each category representing a family of inter-related nodes that collectively define higher-level entities. For example, the Participant category includes nodes that fully characterize CCDI participants, while the Study category contains nodes defining the various aspects of studies.

### Facet-Based Filtering

The facet-based filtering options presented within the left-hand sidebar of the Data Model Navigator allow users to filter the display of nodes based upon their selections for various criteria. This feature enables users to quickly partition the data model into smaller sets of nodes and thereby identify nodes of particular interest. Filter selections apply to both the Graph View and the Table View and are preserved when switching back and forth between viewing modes.

### Graph View

In Graph View, the Data Model Navigator provides users with an interactive, graphical rendering of the data model, which can be filtered as described above to identify relevant nodes and properties according to a user’s interest. Selecting a node opens a Properties Dialogue box which displays the node’s Assignment and Class designations, and quantifies the number of Required, Preferred, and Optional properties. A detailed tabular view of the node can be accessed by selecting the “Open Properties” in the dialogue box.

### Table View

Table View presents tabular information for each node, including all properties and their definitions. This view specifies:

  * Required, Preferred, or Optional status for each property.
  * Acceptable data types for properties.
  * UI display status (whether the property is shown in the application’s Explore dashboard user interface).
  * Controlled vocabularies for enumerated properties are also clearly indicated.